Hello and welcome back to the course on databases.
And today we're going to look at a very important type of join which is called the inner join.
Now we were talking about the theory of an inner join.
Let's have a look at it in practice.
So let's create a new part of our code we'll call this inner join.
And here we're going to work with a bit of a different combination of tables.
We're going to work with the Petz table and we're going to work with the procedure history table so
Petz table as we know.
So I'll just copy this from here Silex are from pets gives us the names and identifications of the pets
that are attributed to this veterinary clinic.
Now the procedure Details table or procedure history table is a table that is a global table for this
organization and it is across all states of the U.S..
So what does that mean.
Let's have a look.
That means is that this table is huge.
There's 2284 rows and so these are all the procedures done in 2016 for all of the pets that visited
any of the clinics of this organization in 2016.
So it's very important to understand the difference here.
The pets table the pets table the owners table these variables are local to the veterinary clinic where
we're conducting for which we're conducting this analysis so that specific one building in Michigan
somewhere in that one state that one building that's very local so therefore they're quite small table
so 100 pets and less than 100 owners 89 owners whereas procedure history is shared this table or this
or this table is shared across all of the clinics of this organization across the whole country.
And they could be they could have their own reasons to do that.
And for instance they keeping the pets and owners tables local due to privacy reasons so that there's
no point there's no need for veterinarians in other states to know the names of the owners and the details
of the pets that are not are not in their clinic.
But at the same time the procedure history table might be shared across the whole organization nationally
because it is important for any missionary to look up any pet I.D. and find out what kind of procedures
had been carried out.
Why could that be will because people go traveling with their pets.
Right.
And for instance if somebody from our clinic or even from our states went and took their pets on a road
trip somewhere to that other part of the US and then the pet needed to see the visionary and like got
sick or something.
Then the veterinarian needed would need to know the previous history of their patient or the pet and
they would need to be able to access it and therefore this is this could be a reason why the procedure
history table is shared globally.
So what does that mean for us.
Well that means that in this table there's lots of pet ideas that are not in our table.
So in our table we have 100 or we only have 100 pets and they have their IDs but in here we will have
way more other pets from other states that have had procedures.
And so the question now is how do we find the pets that our pets that have had procedures how do we
find out what procedures they are.
So what kind of joint Do we need for that.
So now that's what we're going to investigate.
So let's have a look at a small presentation or a slide that I have prepared here and that will help
us understand why we're going to what kind of joint We're going to be using.
So here we've got our two tables right.
So on the left or this blue table there's a big circle here is all of our pets 100 pets that we have
in our clinic and then we have the procedure history which is a much bigger table.
So this is not to scale.
We've got several thousand procedures that happened right.
And what we've got here in yellow is an inner join.
So let's try to understand a great advocate that we need an inner join here so let's try to understand
why we need it.
INTERVIEWER Well what options do we have.
We've got an inner join left join right join and outer join.
Right so which we haven't discussed yet.
So why wouldn't we want a for instance right Joe and why wouldn't we want to take the procedure history
table and then just attach and then just match it up with our pets table.
Well because then we would have all the procedures for all the pets that we're not interested in that
are not in our clinic that we're performing this analysis for.
Right so we don't want that.
We want to get rid of any We want to not include in the select statement or in the output.
Any pets that are not an alcoholic.
So a red Jones not good for us in this case.
What left to live join.
Sounds interesting.
So it would take all of our pets and it would cross-reference all of them to the procedure history.
So basically we would see which it would and this information here.
But then we would be left with all these pets that are in our clinic which don't which have not had
a procedure which have not had any surgery or any vaccination or anything like that.
So that's what we're what we're after.
We want to know just out of out of the Pezzo we have we just want to look at the ones that did have
some sort of procedure.
So basically you want to do that kind of gives us answers that we want only the pets that we have.
So this blue circle overlaps with all of the procedures that all of the pets in the country have had
in these in this chain of clinics in this chain of veterinarians and therefore we want the crossover
between the two which is an inner join so we only want our pets and only the ones that did have a procedure.
And that's why we want an inner join in our case.
So let's go ahead and perform this inner joint to get the result that we want.
So now we can just get rid of this and we can continue from here select from pets and we will say we
really know that we will need an alias as a we can say inner join and I say procedure history
as B and we will say on a dot Petz ID.
And so this pet idea here and we have in the procedure history table so we just check this quickly.
So Ixtapa from procedure history.
So let's just quickly check that we have the same call them here.
Got pet ID here as well.
And so we're just going to say be Daut pet Id call so if you're on this now you'll see that we've got
a pet I.D. and we've got our pets from the stables.
And then we've got the second table here starts from Petar is well so repete ID procedure date procedure.
Type and procedure subclassed.
Right.
So there we go.
We've joined the tables and let's rerun this and see how many you've got.
We've got 41 rows selected in total so.
And if you scroll down through these rows you'll see that some of our pets actually have had several
procedures so blown apart.
The dog has had at least two vaccinations and then we have one.
What else do we have here.
And you just also need to look at the parody Id rather than just the name because sometimes pets have
the same names.
So you'll see that several of our pets have had more than one procedure.
And but in total as you can see we've got in this table we've got the result that we wanted.
We've got all only pets that belong to this veterinarian clinic this specific clinic because we worked
with the pet stable and at the same time all of the pets in here have indeed had a procedure so we don't
we haven't picked up any pets that haven't had any procedures and that's what an inner joined us basically
as we remember from theorie tutorials.
It basically matches up in euros from table from this table to this say from two rows from this table.
And then it just discards and you rolls that didn't match up from either of the tables.
And that's the difference between an inner join and a left join a live join wouldn't discard rows from
the table it would have all of the joints.
If I change this to a left join you know let's have a look at changes to live join.
You will see that.
Now we've got the ones that match top and we've got all of these that didn't match up.
So all of these pets actually didn't have any procedures and that's not what we want.
In this case in this case we want just the ones that match up so also we can have a look at the region.
So if you on a right join here you will see that you've got all of these.
On the other hand you've got all of these procedures that relate to pets not from our clinic.
And that's why this last part is empty and that's not what we want.
We want just the ones where this matched up to this and that's it.
So this is going to be an inner join and the other thing I wanted to show you here is going back to
that some of the peds have had several procedures so you can see that for instance Bonaparte dog whose
IDs J-Date 24 29 he's had two procedures right at least two procedures and these two procedures here.
One was on the 2016 of Filho fourth and one was sweet 16 or fifth or eighth right.
So four days apart fourth of May an eighth of May both vaccinations subgoal five.
But these are two separate different procedures.
So this part this row is different to this row in this table but in this table what happened is this
row got duplicated.
Right so it intentionally Escurial has duplicated the to match it up twice to this table and that's
worth something.
Another thing that you talked about in the theory tutorials about Joines and now you can actually see
it in practice.
So have a look see if you can find another example of that where a row is duplicated because one of
the paths had several procedures and just just check for yourself that indeed that's how it's skewl
is treating this situation.
So there we go there was a first in unjoin as you can see it's a bit more complex than a left join or
right join.
Even though it usually returns less data it is a bit it is a bit more interesting on say a bit more
challenging to understand.
But hopefully now you're quite comfortable fit and have a play around with that try to perform some
of your own inner joins and see what results you can get.
And Alcyone to Tauriel.
Until next time happy analyzing.